Arafat
Yasir Arafat, Yasir

Arafat Calls for Cease-Fire, Deploring Tel Aviv Attack

For the first time since the latest Israeli-Palestinian violence began eight months ago, Yasir Arafat made a public call this afternoon for an immediate and unconditional cease-fire and also condemned the suicide bombing that killed 18 young Israelis outside a Tel Aviv nightclub on Friday night.

The Israeli security cabinet responded by urging Mr. Arafat to follow up his words with "deeds," such as rearresting immediately the Islamic militants who were released from Palestinian prison last fall and who have undertaken a systematic terrorist campaign that reached a new peak on Friday night with the deadliest attack on Israel in five years.

The cabinet also issued what the Palestinians heard as a veiled threat of bombardment: "Israel will act to protect the lives of its citizens and will take every necessary step toward this end."

But a senior Israeli military official, noting that Mr. Arafat's public statement had the potential to be very significant, said that Israel would hold off on a direct military reprisal against Palestinian Authority targets to give the Palestinian leader time to follow through.

"Maybe this is some kind of turning point that grew unfortunately out of yesterday's tragedy," the official said. "The real question, however, is what are the practical measures that Arafat is going to take, and what will be the intensity of the international pressure to do so."

He continued: "We are not going to use military force in order to retaliate or deter or punish or cause a cost on the other side, simply because we believe international pressure is more effective than any military pressure. We will see whether this works."

European diplomats who have shuttled between the two sides said, however, that Mr. Arafat needed to move immediately beyond his statement condemning Friday's "tragic operation against civilians."

Those diplomats added that concrete and discernible steps toward counterterrorism would have to be taken within 24 hours for Israel to continue to hold its fire.

Speaking in Arabic on television in Ramallah, Mr. Arafat was submitting to international demands that he finally agree to make a public call for a cease-fire. He read a statement drafted during a heated meeting with Joschka Fischer, the German foreign minister, who had been in Tel Aviv at the time of the blast, and with Terje Rod-Larsen, the United Nations envoy.

Glasses on the tip of his nose, Mr. Arafat told the cameras, "We have exerted and will now exert the utmost efforts to stop the bloodshed of our people and of the Israeli people, and to do all that is needed to achieve an immediate and unconditional, real and effective cease-fire."

Backed by the American government, the Israelis had been pressing for a statement for months, and especially since Prime Minister Ariel Sharon issued such a call 10 days ago and began a self-imposed policy of military restraint.

Nabil Shaath, a senior Palestinian minister, said international efforts helped "crystallize our ideas" and that the enormity of the bombing also played a role.

"It would have been difficult for such a declaration to come from Arafat if it had been 17 Palestinians who were killed," Mr. Shaath said, not knowing an 18th had died. "There is a feeling among Palestinians that this was really a tragedy for the Israelis. Remember, though, that it's not only what we say and do that matters. If the Israelis use firepower now, that will destroy everything."

As Mr. Arafat spoke, the Israeli security cabinet was huddled in the Defense Ministry in an extraordinary Sabbath session to plan Israel's response, and hundreds of irate Israelis were gathered outside to demand all-out war.

After Mr. Arafat read his statement in Ramallah, Palestinian journalists fled the Palestinian leader's compound, fearful that an Israeli reprisal was imminent. The Palestinian Authority ordered all its employees to leave their offices and citizens to stay inside their homes.

Since midnight, diplomats have been pressing Israel to exercise restraint in its military response, fearing that the conflict is on the brink of escalation. In Washington, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell canceled a trip he was to make to Costa Rica on Sunday to watch developments in the Middle East.

So far, Israel is tightening already tight restrictions to prevent all Palestinians, including workers with permits, from entering Israel. And the military may "try again to fight specifically" against individual Islamic militants, the senior military official said. The army has done so previously by using undercover units to abduct or kill them.

This morning, at the beach-front site of the Tel Aviv explosion, the street still bore the stain of dried rivers of blood. It was littered with bone fragments and bits of scalp with hair attached. The acrid smell of burned flesh fouled the air. Street cleaners arrived shortly before noon to try to erase the signs of what had happened. Police helicopters hovered overhead.

A yellow sign in Russian identified the club, which catered to teenagers, as the Dolphi Disco. The club took its name from the former aquarium, the Dolphinarium, that used to occupy the site. The wall held an incongruously cheery mural of fish frolicking in the sea. A small sign promised "ladies" free entrance.

Indeed, 12 victims were teenage girls or young women, including two sisters. The other 6 were young men. All but one were new immigrants from the former Soviet Union. They ranged in age from 14 to 32.

Many of them attended the same elite high school.

Less than a mile from the site, at the morgue, Russian families streamed in and out all morning to identify the dead. Mothers were collapsing, one after the other, onto the ground outside the building, and paramedics were tending to them.

The club sits in southern Tel Aviv near the mixed city of Jaffa. In the morning, the police cordoned off a nearby mosque where about 20 Muslims were praying because a sizable flag-waving crowd, some of whom were yelling "Death to Arabs!" and "Muhammad is dead!" had gathered outside. By late afternoon, the crowd had grown into an angry mob of hundreds, stoning the mosque.

In Jaffa, after Jews set fire to a restaurant owned by Israeli Arabs, Arab residents began throwing stones as the police tried to keep the situation from turning into a riot.

Many among the scores of people who stood behind the police barriers outside the Dolphi Disco were silent and mournful.

Shirley Biton, 47, wept and tried to describe her feelings.

"It is like some divine decree, or curse, has fallen on us," she said.

Avi Elbaz, 50, from the city of Rishon Letzion, said he had forgone his usual Saturday folk dancing to visit the spot. "I came to identify with these boys and girls, these little souls who last night were here and now they're gone."

The crowd and their anger built over the course of the day. Sarit Dagan, a 26-year-old travel agent, held up a sign that said, "Enough passivity. We want war."

"The people should feel the country is doing something," she said. "Our blood is being spilled and nothing is happening. I have an 11-month-old baby and I feel I can't leave my house. I'm willing to spend a month in a shelter so that this problem can be solved once and for all."

Israelis tend to be defiant in the face of terrorism, refusing to be penned into their homes out of fear of attacks on public places. And there is a streak of fatalism at work. When my time comes, people say, it comes.

That, at least, is the public posture. In reality, though, and especially after a bombing of the magnitude of Friday's, Israeli parents do not want to put their children in harm's way. And so, even if they move about freely themselves, they encircle the children with restrictions.

No buses, because they are frequent targets. No shopping malls. No visits to relatives in towns that are typically struck, like Netanya. And now no nightclubs.

Limor Livnat, the right-wing education minister, said that Israelis "should not cancel all their plans and lock themselves up in their home." But she acknowledged that she suffered intense concern on Friday night until she located her teenage son, who likes to go to the Pacha Club adjacent to the Dolphi Disco.

"On a personal level, I calmed down, but on a national one I haven't," she said.

Israeli officials said that they believed that Mr. Sharon had changed the momentum of the conflict by initiating the policy of military restraint and causing international pressure on Mr. Arafat to build toward today's announcement.

The senior Israeli military official said Israel was now waiting for Mr. Arafat to give strict no-fire orders and lock up militants.

"The job that Arafat is playing is similar to the zookeeper who opens all the cages of the lions and tigers," he said, using a comparison that many Palestinians would find objectionable. "He is not personally going to be the predator. The tigers select and attack their prey. But everyone knows who makes it possible for them to do so."
